Title: Meta-blogging
Date: 2018-05-02 00:49
Author: Elias Dorneles

I've been wanting to write since a little while but whenever I sit to write a
post I end up on an endless yak-shaving of making small adjustments to the
blog. I know that if I wanted to optimize my blogging workflow for writing
I should start using something like Medium, or maybe even go back to good-ol' Wordpress.

But I don't want to increase the exposure of my readership (who are these
people anyway??) to advertising, nor useless tracking, nor annoying popups like "psst,
you should create an account to better read". As [my wise friend Luciano
Ramalho says (in
Portuguese)](https://ramalho.org/wiki/doku.php?id=porque_cada_pessoa_deve_ter_seu_site_na_web),
the Web is supposed to be descentralized and shouldn't be controlled by
half-a-dozen tech corporations with their opaque algorithms.

That's how it's like these days, you wanted to share rambling thoughts with the
world through a blog post, then you gotta choose a blogging platform, suddenly
that choice becomes a political statement. So much meta-cognition, it drives me
nuts sometimes... I just wanted to write!!

That's how I end up writing posts in Vim, which is okay for writing prose but
it just sucks if you want to add a picture to your post.  I guess this explains
why my posts don't have much images these days.

I guess it is still worthwhile, because the blog is pretty snappy. Also, by not
using Medium/Wordpress/whatever, I don't see user stats, which means that I
don't know what posts people are accessing, I don't get comments, all those
"features" that these days would mostly just give me anxiety.

For some reason, I've been finding hard to write stuff in public again. I used
to be a lot braver before. Life happens, and I feel like I've grown a bit
cynical, and maybe the "hopeful ramble" in the blog title isn't so hopeful
anymore. And even if a lot happened in my life over the recent years and
sometimes I think it could be good to share, I don't really feel like writing
about it. It's like, I want to keep them mine.

I also feel like I've become increasingly self-conscious about writing over the
recent years, which kinda pisses me off. "Stop editing, just write!", a brain
thread of throught shouts to another. "But the fear is there for a reason"
another brain thread jumps in, which gets "just worry about it later!" shouted
back from first thread.

Things used to be simpler.

I figured out some time ago that [I have more difficulty to visualize things
than the average person](http://www.bbc.com/news/health-34039054). Since then,
I've grown even more fond of the technique of writing to clear my thoughts.
It's possibly useful to many people, considering we're all getting addicted to
our screens and shit, but I realize that it's probably more relevant for some
than it is for others.

In any case, narration seems to be an important tool for me. My memory is more
like an audiobook than a movie. Or maybe an audiobook with an accompanying
comic book with blurry drawings. It sort of blew my mind when I learned that
this was a thing, and I keep remembering things related to this that I seem to
have experienced very differently than other people and I didn't really
understand it at the time.

Anyway, that's why I like writing. Someone already said "if you're not writing,
you're only thinking that you're thinking", and it rings a bell for me. It's
obviously not true (you can think in many ways), but it does feel like that in
my case, clear thinking usually needs writing.

Okay, enough writing about writing. Nobody really cares. (Btw, see what I mean
about the self-consciousness?)

Hopefully next time I'll have something interesting to say. Cya!
