Title: So, here is a story
Date: 2014-06-13 14:00
Author: Elias Dorneles
Slug: So,-here-is-a-story

Soon after graduating, I went to work as a software developer for a big public
company in Brazil. This company is responsible for a huge part of the country's
IT infrastructure, and they keep trying to build a reputation of being
innovative and pro open source, the kind of thing that excited me a lot. I
thought: *"They
promote Linux and free software... Heck, their website is built with Plone.
I'll get to do cool stuff in Python all day!"* I
know it's naive, but that was my thinking back then.

So, initially I thought I had won the lottery. But that feeling didn't take
long to dissipate. What I ended up finding was NOT a place where engineers are
working together on great projects, embracing free software and releasing good
stuff to the world.

That company is weird. And the biggest problem for me was: I was young and
inexperienced, a child basically, surrounded mostly by other children.  You
see, most developers there are pretty smart people. But they don't have much
say in the decisions about the software development, arguably the thing they
know best.

The software development department is run mostly by traditional managers who
don't seem to understand how software development actually works. It seems that
it has been on deficit for quite some time, though nobody cares too much --
hey, the taxpayers are still funding it.

So, those managers wanted the Big Ole' Software Factory. You know, those
imaginary places with human machinery resembling an assembly line that if you
set up just right and feed it with the right input, you'll get good software on
the other end.

Well, what they've got is a bunch of talented people managed in a very
paternalistic style. And that leads to painful frustration for the developers
who, being treated like children, end up behaving a lot like children (myself
included, I am ashamed to say).

I don't need to tell you that they don't produce great software. Well, when
they get to ship something, that is. But I'm not talking about the quality of
their software right now.

Right now, my point is: this kind of place is not a good place for someone
trying to grow into a good, mature engineer.

You need a healthy environment to build up maturity and excellence. And an
environment is not healthy if you are encouraged to simply follow orders and
maintain the status quo. Because you won't learn to make better decisions if
you are not supposed to be trusted to decide very basic things, like what
software to install in your development machine.

People at that company end up having serious trust issues with their bosses and
colleagues because of the unhealthy environment. The funny thing is, I think
most people are there because they like the job security, but they don't get to
feel really safe much. At least, not the majority of the people I knew there.
They are often afraid that "someone is out to get them".

I wish I had read the wonderful [Team Geek
book](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920018025.do) back then, and I wish
everybody there would read that book now and give it some serious thought. That
would bring some light to several of the issues they have there, and maybe the
place would be better than it is.

I remember getting there full of energy, eager to learn and do stuff.
Somewhere along the way, I kind of lost the will. I remember thinking: "Okay, I
give up, I don't know how to deal with this. I'll remain a mediocre performer,
as that seems what they want around here. I will focus on honing my guitar
skills, so that I won't want to kill myself."

Well, I moved on to greener pastures some time ago, though not before another
experience at another not-so-great government institution. And although I'm not
young anymore, I think I've managed to stay curious and I'm still eager to
learn and do stuff. That's the important thing, right?

But sometimes, looking back at how much I have improved after leaving that
place, I can't help but wonder what if I had never gone there in the first
place? Would I be able to enjoy working, learning and growing as I do now? Or
would I be like so many others out there, whining and thinking I would be
happier enjoying the job security of a public employee?

I guess I'll never know. It's probably better thinking it would be the latter,
though. That way I'll have no regrets.    Thanks to my friends who reviewed
this.
